# SwoleGator Alpha Build
James Blackmon, 
Maria Carmona, 
Joshua Restuccia, 
Jenna Sheldon, 
Mary Williams

Repository Link: https://github.com/JoshRestuccia/SwoleGator

## Project Summary
At the time of the Alpha Build, the SwoleGator device successfully measures the velocity and repetition count of the motion done by a weightlifter. It communicates this data to the SwoleGator application through Bluetooth to be displayed and stored in the user's profile in the application. The app features functional profile login and logout, the ability to view a user's profile, connect to the SwoleGator device, and view lift data in real-time. The application is also set up to eventually feature a social environment, where users can post their lifts to be viewed and shared by friends or trainers. In addition, while the hardware only measures a single direction of velocity, in the future, it will be calibrated by exercise type to measure the useful velocity of that particular exercise to be a more widely adaptable and useful product. 

## Navigation & Other Useful Instructions
The application opens to a login screen, where the user can choose to log in with an existing account or create a new account. Once either of these actions is completed, the user is taken to a home screen. On this screen, the user should connect to the hardware device using the top button, titled "Connect device". This is as simple as clicking "scan for devices" and then clicking on the SwoleGator option when it pops up. The application will only display a compatible SwoleGator device to avoid connections to extraneous Bluetooth devices in the area. Once connected, the SwoleGator button will change colors, showing a successful connection. The user can then go back to the home screen and navigate to "start lift", where they will choose an exercise type and follow instructions for calibration, and then begin their lift and view lift data in real-time. Once a lift has been completed, the user can return to the home screen once again and view their profile to see all past lift data. The final button is a logout option, which is self-explanatory to users.


# Alpha Build Required Components
## Usability
### Interface
All interface elements have been implemented and are accessible. At this point, the UI is entirely contained in the software elements, with an intuitive React Native app that connects to the hardware remotely over BLE. For our interface elements, we have a login/sign-up page where users can input their credentials, which are later stored in (or checked against) a Firebase database once the submit button is pressed. We have also created a page where the user can select (by clicking a button) what type of exercise they want to start performing. The app incorporates a page where the user can connect to the device over BLE with a simple click of a button and, once connected, it will visually alert the user by changing to a different color. Once connected and after device calibration, the user clearly visualizes their maximum velocity, the current repetition count of their exercise session, and the current velocity at which they are doing the exercise they selected previously. In addition to these, a social page was created where users can add friends to network and share their fitness progress with them. The app has a simple login and usage interface, with clear buttons and responses like any other app. In addition, a persistent state is evident in the highlight of buttons (such as when the user presses the button to connect the ESP32 to the app with the button remaining a darker color) and pages on the app such as the graphing consistently sending calls to update and display data.
### Navigation
The app now begins at the login state and the user can log in/sign up and navigate between functional screens, including pages like selecting exercise types, starting lift (where they can see their current data), connecting to the device through BLE, accessing their social pages, or logging out and navigating back and forth between these. This is all built to be easily understood and accessible to users. Progress has been made from an ongoing bug related to delayed response to button presses, and should be improved as we continue to improve the rendering of screens. Every feature is easily discovered from the home page. Popups are also in the process of being improved to make errors more easily understood by users.
### Perception
The app and device are intuitive and easy to use for the intended purpose. The context of logging in, connecting to the device, selecting the exercise, and beginning the lift is logical and easy to follow. The continuous data received over BLE is clearly labeled and shown to avoid user confusion while performing exercises. The interface buttons have clear labels to indicate the page they refer to for simplified user navigation, and since the hardware requires no physical interaction, user frustration is reduced. Application state changes with logged-in users/guests, as well as connected and disconnected devices being persistently accessible on the "connect device" screen.
### Responsiveness
So far in the building of our application, no busy wait loops have been discovered. The Bluetooth search feature continues for a defined amount of time and displays that it is searching until it finishes, reducing confusion from the user and prolonged waits. Once the device connects over BLE, a calibration period of 1 minute is started, where users perform exercise reps to calibrate the device and calculate thresholds based on the exercise. The period start and finish is indicated to the user with alert messages.
## Build Quality 
### Robustness
No major crashes or glitches are apparent in this build. The app connects to Bluetooth for an extended period and can continuously receive and store data, as well as display the data on the app screens. Any delay from rendering does not block background processes and is being improved upon as data display is optimized. In addition, Bluetooth calls between software and hardware do not cause any waiting loops, even if the connection breaks.
### Consistency
There is consistency in the software aspects of logins and app behavior in our build. The app will predictably find our device to connect to, and only our device. The hardware aspect is calibrated with each use to ensure consistency in measurements from sensors per type of exercise and user pace. This being said the reliability of the IMU is not perfect due to the nature of the sensors. Even though velocity calculations inevitably accumulate errors over time, we have managed to reduce these errors by automatically resetting data arrays on the Arduino IDE program of our device after obtaining 10 velocity values. Due to these error-prone readings, further integration of the velocity to find position will introduce additional errors, which is why we have prevented the expansion of such a feature.
### Aesthetic Rigor
No major cosmetic software issues are currently present. A bug that did not show all of the buttons redirecting to various pages was addressed and fixed in this alpha build.  The app successfully displays useful values to the user, including max velocity and rep count for the exercise, and plans are in place to visually improve choosing an exercise. As for the physical artifact, it was made into a compact design for attachment to the weight bar that can be printed and tested to be perfected in the beta build.
## Vertical Features
### External Interface
- User Profiles can be created, accessed, logged in and out of in a persistent state format through Firebase. The profile is visible and will contain historical lift data. If logged in, the app acknowledges the user by name and otherwise displays a guest message. 
- Exercise Type & Calibration is visible on the external interface and will remain as the lift is performed and data is gathered that is then stored to profile for future use. These options are shown as the user chooses the begin lift option. Exercise type is selected after starting a lift. Once the lift is started, the calibration will automatically be triggered. For the beta build, the calibration will only be triggered when the user hits the calibration button on the app. During the calibration, the user performs the exercise at their regular pace for 1 minute, during which a maximum velocity and threshold will be calculated. The threshold is used to then determine when a repetition has occurred post-calibration.
- Maximum Velocity & Repetition Count are displayed in the app as the lift is in progress, giving the user useful feedback on their exercise. This is stored in a persistent state (Firebase database) for future use and analysis.
- Device Connection to the physical hardware is performed on one screen and remains as other screens are navigated to and data is gathered and displayed.  
### Persistent State
- User Profiles are stored in Firebase so that an account created in one use of the app can be accessed and edited for future use. The data is not wiped after each lift but instead stored so that profiles can be useful in the long term to show trends. Ideally, this will be expanded upon to display to other users in social features. User profiles are processed within the software's internal systems.
- Exercise Type & Calibration are stored as they affect the way that velocity is measured within internal systems and the users' goals. This data is stored in Firebase persistent state as well, to show specific trends per exercise.
- Maximum Velocity & Repetition Count is stored to the profiles as well as exercise type, again to see trends and improvement over time, which is the main usefulness of our device- to track improvement (or any change) over time and assess their fitness. This data is calculated in internal systems based on sensors within the hardware.
- Device connection to the physical hardware is persistent; once connected, the chip showing the SwoleGator device name remains a different color. We hope to eventually implement an icon that is visible on all screens of the app to show this state, which will take place as a process in internal systems.
### Internal Systems
- User Profiles are processed within the software communicating with Firebase, allowing for the account creation, logging in, and logging out. The profile can remain logged in on the same device by storing the profile in the internal systems of the software. The profile and data attached are used to calculate goals for the user and eventually to communicate with other accounts in a social environment hosted within the app.
- Exercise Type & Calibration change how velocity is processed and reps are counted. For example, different exercises have different directions of velocity that are important and will have different goals over time. The calibration is done for 1 minute where the user will be performing the exercise at their regular pace. During such period a maximum velocity and threshold value is calculated. The threshold is calculated by the equation (max v + min v) / 2 and is used after calibrating to detect exercise repetitions. More specifically, if the current velocity is above the threshold, the above threshold state is changed to true and the repetition counter is increased. Currently, the calibration is accurate only when the device is pointing in the positive x-direction of the IMU. However, for the beta build, the calibration will detect the device orientation and determine which direction to calculate velocity from. 
- Maximum Velocity & Repetition Count is performed, along with calibration, on the Arduino IDE side on the hardware. This data is then sent to the application through BLE to be displayed and stored, as well as analyzed to allow the user to create and track goals. As the app is perfected there will ideally be more calculations performed on the data with different exercises to give recommendations.
- Device connection between the application and ESP32 is handled through BLE connection code in the software and attributes given on the hardware side. It is stored in a persistent state and used to display to the user the connection, and whether or not this connection has been broken, which is processed through the internal systems.
- Velocity Calculation is performed via an algorithm on the device’s Arduino IDE program. A moving average filter smoothes out the accelerometer data from the MPU6050 to prevent noisy data. After filtering, the rate of change is calculated by using the equation Vf = Vi + at, where Vf is the current velocity, Vi is the previous velocity, a is the filtered acceleration, and t is time (1 ms). Current velocities are stored in an array of 10 values which then gets cleared after filled to prevent accumulative errors from acceleration integration. 

